---
layout: single
title: DSA - Chapter 1
categories: DSA
use_math: true
toc: true
---

# Chapter 1. Induction, Recurrence Equations, and Recursive Calls

## Mathematical Induction

- **Mathematical Induction** is a general way to prove that some statement S(n) about the integer n is true for all n $\ge$ n<sub>0</sub>.
Step 1: Prove the statement s(n) when n has its smallest value, k.; This is called the **basis**.
Step 2: Prove that if S(n<sub>0</sub>), ..., S(k) are true for some k $\ge$ n<sub>0</sub>, then S(k+1) is also true.; This is called **induction**.

## Recurrence Equations

- A mathematical function is *recursive* if it is defined in terms of itself.
e.g., f(n) = f(n-1) + n<sup>2</sup>

### Telescoping
- The value of a recursive function given certain parameter value(s) can be obtained by **telescoping** until a **base case** is reached.

### Two rules
- **Base case**; the case for which the value of the function is directly known without resorting to recursion.
- **Progress**; For the cases that are to be solved recursively, the recursive call must always be to a case that makes progress towards a base case.

## Recursive functions
In recursive programming, we use a solution of a *smaller* problem to solve a *larger* proglem.

### Example 1: Reverse elements in array A
- Base case: If the array is *empty*, we don't have to do anything to reverst it.
             If there is only *one element* in the array, we don't need to do anything at all. 

- Insights: If we know how to reverse an array of n-2 elements, we know how to reverse an array of n elements.

```
reverse(A, p, q) {
    if (p >= q) return;
    swap(A[p], A[q]);
    reverse(A, p+1, q-1);
}
```

### Example 2: Generate all the permutations of n characters stored in the array A[1 ... n]
- Recursion strategy (progress): The permutations can be divided into n groups. All permutations in the i-th group are ended with the i-th character.
  Each group can be formed by permuting the other (n-1) characters and then adding the special one at the end.

```
perm(A, k, n) {
    if (k==1)
        output A[1 ... n]
    else
        for (i=1 to k) do {
            swap(A[i], A[k]);
            perm(A, k-1, n);
            swap(A[i], A[k]);
        }
}
```

## Conclusion
To analyze a recursive algorithm, we perform 2 tasks:
1. Prove its correctness
   - Use Mathematical Induction
2. Estimate its running time
   - Formulate it as a recursive function