---
layout: single
title: Django - 3
categories: Django
use_math: true
toc: true
---

# HTML

- A way of marking up text to indicate that some text is different than other text
- We “**tag**” portions of the text to communicate meaning

## World-Wide-Web Consortium

- Formed by Tim Berners-Lee of MIT
- Founded to develop standards around HTML, CSS, XML, etc
- Insure that the web was based on open standards rather than propriety vendor products - a bit like cat herding

# HTML Document

## Structure of an HTML Document

<!DOCTYPE html>

<html>

<head>

meta-data…          //Metadata about the page.

</head>

<body>

Page content…      //DIsplayable content of the page.

</body>

</html>

## Special file names

- When a URL points to a directory in your web server, it looks for a file with a special name:
    - **index.html, index.htm, index.php,** etc.
- While there is a convention, the “default file” is configurable - so nothing is “sure”
- Usually **index.htm** or **index.html** is a safe bet
- This only works when viewing through a web server - when viewing from disk, you must view the file.

## HTML Tag Basics

- Tags “mark up” the HTML document.
- Tags are read and interpreted by the browser - but not shown.
- A self closing tag does not need a corresponding end tag.

## HTML Links

- One of the key things about HTML is making a set of pages and making “hypertext” links amongst those pages.
- Links are what make the “web” a “web” - it is a web of interlinked documents.
- The interlinked nature of the web leads to the “knowledge” the search engines like Google appear to have “intelligence”.
- <a href=”http://www.google.com/page1.html”>
    - **“a”** is a short for **“anchor”** and **“href”** is short for **“hypertext reference”**
    

# Cascading Style Sheets

## CSS Syntax

- CSS syntax is very different than HTML
- CSS is a set of “rules” which in include a **“selector”** and one or more **“properties”** and **“values”** as well as punctuation
    - Selector - Which part of the document does this rule apply to
    - Property - Which aspect of CSS are we changing
    - Value - What are we setting the property to

## Using CSS in HTML

### Applying CSS to our HTML

- **Inline** - right on an HTML tag - using the style= attribute
- An **embedded style sheet** in the <head> of the document
- As **external style sheet** in a separate file

### Span and div tag

- Span - New “inline” tag with no styling
- Div - New unsettled block tag with no padding, margin, background-colour or anything else.
